The Organization of Behavior
Donald Hebb (1949)  —  Notes dated 12/29/2025

Page 1
Sensory input → thinking → motor output
Attention: selectivity of response; 'thinking' is not just reacting to sensory data, as we choose what to respond to or notice.
Neurons have 'spontaneous' potentials even without sensory excitation; they will eventually fire by themselves. [Why?]
In general, 2 or more neurons must fire simultaneously to cross threshold & excite a 3rd neuron.
Existence of attention suggests a partly-autonomous, nonsensory type of cerebral activity.
Need a theory that accounts for sensory generalization & stability of memory, based on the workings of neurons & synapses.
Does perception depend on 1) excitation of specific cells, or 2) on a pattern of excitation, so that the locus is unimportant?
If you give blind man vision for 1st time, has no trouble learning colors, but may struggle learning to ID simple objects. [What is innate vs. learned in visual development?] [Takes months to automatically identify squares]
Mentally picturing a triangle while fixated on one point is very hard, but w/ eye movements it's easy; activation of motor system deeply important for visual integration.
Perception of brightness is relative & not absolute; train a rat to favor intensity 1x over 2x, then show it 2x & 4x & it will start favoring 2x. [size, brightness, pitch]
When your eyes pick up an image, the shape is roughly projected into the visual cortex (seeing a square produces a squarish activation pattern in visual cortex).
100m rods & cones in retina → 1m cells in optic nerve → 150–200m cells in visual cortex.

"You cannot logically be a determinist when it comes to physics, chemistry, & biology, & be a mystic on thinking."
"When theory becomes static, it is apt to become dogma."

Page 2
Diagram at top of page:
generalization → (attention ↔ memory)
Proposition → repeated stimulation of specific receptors slowly leads to formation of an 'assembly', which can act briefly as a closed system after stimulation passes [image or idea].
Reverberatory memory trace — how can a new memory last for a few seconds or minutes if the wiring of brain has yet to change?
When axon of cell A is near enough to excite cell B, & repeatedly takes part in firing it, some growth process or metabolic change takes place so A can help fire B even easier.
Neurons that fire together, wire together.
Images projected from retina → cortex are distorted, yet we can learn to ID objects; so part of perception must come outside visual cortex.
'Growth' of cell assemblies need not strictly mean increasing its # of neurons, but recruiting & abandoning neurons over time.
Assemblies likely to be organized or integrated on their own before associations begin forming between assemblies.
Properties of a given assembly might be significantly changed across stages of integration [perception in child vs. adult].
When learning to distinguish a triangle: fixate on the angles A, B, & C in sequence, but the starting point & order of fixation differs from 1 exposure to another, leading to more-independent subgroups within the triangle assembly to form; viewing triangle at different angles & distances has similar fractionizing effects.
Neurons of subgroups dropped as generalization of main assembly takes place.
More constant the stimulation from an object is, the more readily it will be identified & responded to.
Animals tend to respond to the least-variable objects in their environment.
Attention → central reinforcement of a sensory process.

Page 3
Subassemblies can together form superordinate assemblies so long as a temporal overlap occurs via reverberation of 1 subassembly while another is being created.
Some learning is a function of set & drive 'other learning'; becomes reflexive (hard or impossible for it to go extinct) or be avoided after it has been learned.
Learning of the mature animal owes its efficiency to the slow & inefficient learning that has gone before.
Claim: going up phylogenetic scale, mature animals have greater capacity for learning complex relationships but have a slower learning rate as infants.
Brain of infant has some intrinsic organization, which later, learning with experience will slowly morph into refined assemblies to make associations.
Intelligence across animals corresponds to: 1) size of cerebrum, 2) proportion of sensory to associative tissue in cortex.
Lower vertebrates have small cerebellums & massive sensory cortex. [As opposed to prefrontal/association cortex]
Some concepts are nonverbal (as in animals), but others have their place in words & thus cannot be an element of thought without language.
To forest: where there is a selectivity of behavior that can last minutes or longer (→ attention) [also: attitude].
Great emotional disturbance (like terror) may disrupt many different phase cycles; lesser disturbance may only disrupt the present phase cycle, allowing an alternate to take its place. [Emotions guiding learning]
A varied experience forms a mechanism for adaptation to the stronger stimulation environment.
New learning is facilitated by old — concepts build on one another.
Restructuring of thoughts = insight.

Page 4
Assemblies are formed first, then connections between assemblies, x Everything is unpredictable.
Something must exert control of their phase sequence.
An experimenter who wants their subjects to learn will conceptual series.
Learning by making associations of diff. sensory modalities.
Innate motivations like hunger can be drawn into cortex by less tied to a bodily effect. [What controls such motivations?]
Restlessness is will be eating or drinking or finish before the led or drink.
A dog w/ a removed stomach will still eat; an animal.
Belly is full & sex is satisfied.
Motivation = biological need — e.g. unrecorded learning when or content [will be learned], one followed by discomfort pleasure.
Law of effect: an act clearly followed by satisfaction pleasure → bell ring at meal time; Pavlov's table makes water run.
Critical cells involved [sensory → motor connections?]
In a response will form connections between. Clark Hull
Classical conditioning: any stimulus that occurs; responses are retained & not others.
Motivation is the qualifier of reinforcement; the same [if directing] of muscular contractions, not their accuracy.
"The main question for psychology concerns the timing.
Innate given species, regardless of knowledge of a particular individual. End state is convergent across individuals. 2) End state can be believed to behave where 3) specific motor seq. may vary but.
The complexity of phase sequences possible in the brain.
"Phylogenetic differences of insight are differences in mistakes made today may be entirely diff. from those of yesterday."
Learning is: 'random' breakthroughs rather than creaming — learning in the first place.
"Claim: motor learning at maturity is perceptual."

Page 5
Learning is a permanent change in responsiveness.
Excitation, inhibition, & fatigue are transient changes in responsiveness.
Sleep, sex = cyclical changes in excitability.
Unconsciousness as background spontaneous firing in central nervous system, disrupted by afferent activity. [All conscious thinking is driven by afferent sensory input]
Sleep is not the absence of organization, but the nervous system switching to an alternative organization: hypersynchrony.
Deprivation (practice) can have negative effects on learning.
Repeating a word over & over makes it seem strange — 'un-recognizable' → continuous activation leads to deterioration (transformation) of cell assemblies.
γ un-recognizable — used in high frequency... [frequent but not contiguous]
While in other cases it doesn't apply; view thousands of verbal deterioration (transformation) of cell assemblies.
Pleasure is a directed growth or development of cerebral deterioration, then the lies in phases not cell assemblies.
Decorticated cats show sham (unprovoked intense) rage.
Fear → emotions can come from laterally rage also.
There are integrative emotions (pleasure) & disruptive emotions (rage, fear, disgust).
Chimps that reared in captivity are afraid of snakes at first sight; chimps born blind, if given sight, are not immediately afraid of strangers — but through normal experience.
w/ vision (an injury from strangers) tends to be excited immediately afraid of strangers — but through normal experience. Classical fears via neurons, vs being bold.
Biological preparedness: emotions that aren't innate but at strangers.
Also not learned through trial-error type of experience — but through general experience.
Habituation to monotony leads to complex daydreaming.
Interest & motivation are the stability & persistence of a phase sequence.

Page 6
Emotions fall into 3 classes (by causes):
1) Conflicting phase sequences
2) Absence of stimulation or support for a phase sequence
3) Interruption of timing of a phase sequence
Mental illness seems to be part constitution (heredity) & part.
When is early experience related to disorder of maturity?
Will the balance differing between normal man & capable of.
It is a mistake to assume a 'normal' man is capable of cognitive tasks; a loss of bilateral removal of prefrontal lobe, or here.
Decortication: where patients still have high IQ; their puzzle-solving skills decrease, but verbal/everyday intelligence is unaffected.
→ But damage to any part of an infant's cortex is unaffected.
Some types of behavior require lots of brain tissue for their establishment, but can persist when part of available tissue has decreased later. Alfred Binet
2 meanings of intelligence: 1) innate potential → the capacity for development; 2) functioning of a brain that has undergone some development (organizing into effective CA & PS). [experienced]
Intellectual growth requires an innate potential & a stimulating environment.

Margin Notes
The following terms/names appear in the margins of the notes, organized by page.
Page 1 — Margin Terms & Names
Zener cards
Mind-body dualism
EEG
Hypersynchrony
Gestalt psychologists
Figure-ground perception
Field theory & equipotentiality — where brain is capable of performing given perception or thought
How much visual training data does a human brain take in during development?
Importance of fixation points & eye movements
Immaterial aspects of time
Names listed (right margin):
Joseph Banks Rhine
James Mill
Sigmund Freud
Ivan Pavlov
Clifford Morgan
Rafael Lorente
Karl Lashley
Kurt Koffka
Wolfgang Köhler

Page 2 — Margin Terms & Names
KV cache
Context window / continual learning
Embryology & learning before birth
Neuroblastaxis
Synaptic knobs
Cell assemblies as strange loops & tangled hierarchies
Classical conditioning
Names listed:
B.F. Skinner
Cornelius Koppers
Kogbvaian Bradimann
David Krech

Page 3 — Margin Terms
Transfer in learning
Series of cycles / conceptual cycles
Phase sequence / cycle
Cell assembly phase sequence / cycle
Conceptual rather than sensory associations
Afferent-sensory / efferent motor for the cortex [as opposed to prefrontal/association cortex]
Plasticity of brain — to make associations
Abstraction, generalization, similarity
Instinct & emotions
Expectancy, set & attention
Gestalt — the whole is greater than the sum of its parts

Page 4 — Margin Terms & Names
Unpredictable: everything is unpredictable
Activity need / a purpose
Restlessness is...
Sex, fat as primary biology
Hunger, thirst
Evolution of responses
Maternal behavior
Instinct = species predictable
Language as but one mechanism of abstraction
Perception of learning
Vision: sight ≠ sudden vision; motor learning input
Intention (language)
Aphasia (loss of language)
Names listed:
A Primates
Edward Thorndike
Clark Hull
Leonard Hobhouse
Robert Yerkes

Page 5 — Margin Terms & Names
12 cranial nerves
Excitation, inhibition, fatigue
Tonic = slow response
Functional dedifferentiation
Sleep/dreaming
See strange intelligence
Names listed:
Santiago Cajal
Warren McCulloch
Henry K. Beecher

Page 6 — Margin Terms & Names
Fight/flight
Freeing Laura
Culture-dependent
Nature vs. nurture of intelligence
Names listed:
Alfred Binet
John H. Richter
Paul Broca
Company Box [Los Ant-tv-led]
Sigmund [?]
